1.1 Introduction to Machine Learning
There was a huge increase in artificial intelligence (AI) in a glimpse. Machine learning
is a subset of AI. The main importance of machine learning is identifying the structure
of data or format suitable data models used by the users. However, Machine learning
is related to computer science and varies from former computational methods. Previously, Algorithms were written exclusively programmed instructions for computers
to solve problems. Now machine learning (Othman et al. 2018) algorithms are used
to educate the computers on data inputs and data statistics, analysis is used to produce
output values within a range. Automatically decision is taken based on the sample data
with the help of models and inputs. Many technologies are using machine learning
(Gilpin et al. 2018) algorithms and get benefited. Facial recognition is one of the
technologies which permit social media platforms like Facebook and Instagram’s
to help the users tag and share friends’ photos (Logas et al. 2022). Movies or television shows using optical character recognition technology help to change images
to text into movable (Jiang et al. 2022). Self-driving cars also depend on machine
learning to map the routes (Saha and De 2022). Machine learning is consistently
improving technology, which requires continuously improving methodologies for
analyzing may affect the machine learning process (Pazzani et al. 2001). Supervised
and unsupervised learning are two basic machine learning methods. Along with these
two methods k-nearest neighbor algorithm, decision tree learning methods and deep
learning are other important concepts in machine learning.
Firstly, supervised learning purpose is to learn by similar outputs by identifying
errors and changing the models depending on the output (Cai et al. 2022). This
model also uses the patterns to identify the labeled values and unlabeled data also.
Supervised learning algorithms will make sure to identify the images and produce
labels to the particular image by seeing the cat image, supervised learning will be
able to identify and label it as an animal. Unsupervised learning is to identify the
secret patterns in the data and automatically identify the classification of raw data.
This is used for transactional data and complex data is more expansive and unrelated
to organize properly (Kotenko et al. 2022). Example like unsupervised learning will
be able to tag all cat images and group it.
Machine learning is based on statistics with basic knowledge by understanding and
supporting machine learning algorithms. Correlation is used to identify the relation
among two dependent or independent variables. Regression was used for identifying
the relation among dependent and independent variable. When an independent variable is given and needs to identify the dependent variable, the regression statistics
used to identify it is called regression enables prediction capabilities. To identify the
pattern k-nearest neighbor algorithm is used for regression and classification. Small
and positive integer is k value. Example of separating the square and circle shapes
into two different classes, this classification is used.
Decision tree is a predictive algorithm based on the models, observations, analysis and gives target data values. This model is created to predict the target based
input values. The data attributes identified based on the observation are branches



the conclusion of data target values is nothing but leaves. Deep learning is introduced based on neural networks with multiple layers in artificial neural networks
based on hardware. The output is connected to an input to the next layer in the
deep learning process. Computer vision and speech recognition have realized significant advances in deep learning approaches (Li et al. 2022). Humans can give biased
decisions that lead to negative results, machine learning helps to overcome such
issues and give unbiased decisions. Black box (Guo 2020; Perarasi et al. 2020a)
systems exploit sophisticated machine learning models to identify separated secure
data. Medical status, risk of insurances, eligibility score for credit cards acknowledge
using machine learning algorithms construct predictive models and map the features
into class in the learning phase (Svenmarck et al. 2018). The learning process is
formed by the digital trances that are left after operating daily activities like social
media activities, purchases, etc. Huge data may handle human biases and prejudices.
Decision models are accomplished by inheriting biases, wrong decisions and illegal
activities. Various scientific communities studied the issues of discussing machine
learning decision models. Even though illustratable machine learning is the important
case and accepted newly considering the situation, many ad-hoc distributed results.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. The First section discusses the
importance of cyber security in XAI. Next section discusses Deep learning using XAI
which follows the Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Section 1.5 is about applications
of cyber security in XAI. Section 1.6 discusses the comparison of XAI using black
box methods and finally about the conclusion.

1.1.1 Motivation
The unique aim of the chapter is to reach the novelty in research work using machine
learning. AI understands different technologies under the same umbrella like machine
learning to predict the results. Machine learning ultimately reaches the goal to reach
for accurate results with training the model.

1.1.2 Scope of the Paper
Machine learning is one of the best options in career applications for smart systems to
handle business attacks. Target is to calculate human intelligence and be able to make
decisions more precisely under any situation. AI handles the different technologies
that come under the same domain like pattern recognition, big data, machine learning,
artificial intelligence and various other technologies. This is the reason AI is having
much future scope in many applications.


1.2 Importance of Cyber Security in eXplainable Artificial
Intelligence

Industries progressively improved with a better complex cyber security (Pienta et al.
2020) ecosystem depending on various types like users, technology and processes to
functional roles. Cyber security is dependent on relations between users and groups,
users, organizations and technology, technology and users. From the above trusting
peers, cyber security prevents separately to defend against cyber attacks. AI models
cite the knowledge from the gathered data. Actually, no human will believe the AI
system for the possible and desirable quality of data, difficult methods and accountability, trained AI engineer. AI is trust related software that gives solutions to cyberattacks. You may ask how to trust the AI models in cyber security, which are developed
based on data analysis and predict the solutions from the data. The simple answer for
this question is that XAI (Guo 2020; Arrieta et al. 2020) will justify reliability, ability,
and trustworthiness. Main challenge for AI is the inability to understand and compare
between transition models. A simple example is Autonomous vehicles (Perarasi et al.
2020b). Trustworthy AI should explain its decisions to allow the human expert to
understand the underlying data evidence and causal reasoning.
Complex black box models study from machine learning and deep learning parameters. Based on the black boxes models, AI engineers identify direct models to make
decisions and identify the behavior of models. Cyber security is liable for attacks
and targets the trusted security in critical systems. Therefore XAI from AI plays
an important role in developing the solution based AI with interpretability. Interpretability further assures uniformly in decision-making to detect the imbalanced
dataset. Interpretability strengthens the powerful solution based AI using highlighting
hidden could change the prediction. The decision tree model is developed based on the
Intrusion detection system attacks (Svenmarck et al. 2018; Stampar and Fertalj 2015).
The intrusion detection system developed fast in study and organization research in
exchange for increasing cyber attacks on government and commercial enterprises
internationally and action on cost is increased consistently (Lee et al. 2001). The
main harmful cyber crimes are from vicious associates, denial of servers, web attacks,
and organizations may lose the intellectual property related to vicious attacks in the
system. Organizations install various firewalls, software like antivirus and intrusion
detection systems against those attacks. Intrusion detection is a crucial role in cyber
security, grants to determine vicious network activities previously compromises data
connection, availability and opportunity. It is a method to identify security breaches
by interrogating models in the data system.
Day-to-day, the digital system is adopted by the world. The network access leads to
a lack of security issues that the Internet of Things devices (Lee et al. 2001; Chennam
et al. 2022). Intrusion attacks with high possibilities on Internet of Things devices
connected to the internet lead to network devices safely from intrusion. An IDS was
developed to avoid important data from vicious acts. Important data with network
access needs to be permanently protected from all pursuit to consume, expose, alter,
disable, steal or gain unauthorized access. Traditional intrusion detection systems,
mainly signature-based, identify only popular attacks and may not identify new
attacks. Machine learning is the best approach which is exclusively developed to
maintain detection accuracy.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has helped all the industries with effective results in
deploying various applications to monitoring, Decision Making, Solving Complex
problems, creative approaches, observation analysis, Language Recognition and
Learning. Artificial intelligence has collaborated with additional technology like
Machine Learning, Neural networks and Deep Learning. Artificial intelligence is
used to compute the programs and prepare the system to behave like a human brain
(Uma Maheswari et al. 2021; Deshpande et al. 2020). The AI has excelled in thinking,
retrieving and taking decisions sometimes faster than the human brain. AI applications are used in medical Care, Teaching and Learning, Law, Commerce and public
Departments etc. The above applications are intended to say that algorithms rule the
world by AI, which is inevitable (Swapna et al. 2022).
XAI advantages are mainly concerned with ethics and continuous improvements.
XAI required enough trust to handle the AI. For decades various AI models gave
biased results or not perfect results which lead to ensuring the safety in AI decisions
without any faults. To justify the final decisions taken by the AI required logical
reasoning in decision making. AI helps to identify the malware weekly updated
and all possibilities of pattern recognition, behavioral attacks of ransomware able
to identify before entering into the system. Bots help to clear maximum chunks in
internet networks. Stolen login details can create false account details, tampering
data; bots can be the correct menace. Handling automatic threats is not possible
alone. AI and machine learning will heal to construct the good bots to identify the
engine crawlers, bad bots etc. AI starts to identify the data and accepts to provide
cybersecurity to understand the strategy consistently.

1.2.1 Importance of Trustworthiness
The importance of Trustworthiness is an essential aspect to measure the safety, performance and reliability. The qualities requirements to say as trustworthy are the system
must be accountable, fair, reliable behavior, reasonable and acceptable. The author
Stephen Hawking says “AI can spread faster and can be violent if it is not controlled
properly”. The AI systems need to be authorized and validated in each design and
implementation phase. The AI systems need to be authorized and validated in each
phase of the design and implementation. There are different algorithms used to predict
the risk of the system, and it occur due to low-quality data training, narrow perception of the problem, technical issue management etc. can lead to unrecoverable loss
of people, properties and loss the trust on AI practices. AI applications are used
in important applications like facial recognition software, Tagging picture in television media, Health care practices and self-driving car are the high-risk applications,
wrong decision may cause life. The author Davinder Kaur has raised some questions


Table 1.1 Questioner table states the importance of Trustworthy in AI
Research questionnaire

Proposed solution

Purpose of proving AI is trustworthy

Decisions taken by the AI system should be
ethical practice, robust in nature, Lawful and
acceptable

What protocols are used to work AI systems?

We can empower and help to maintain the AI
system lawful practices

Why human control involved

AI systems need to collaborate with human
intervention and machines in cognitive
decision making

Reasons for AI acceptable

AI systems have proven to be trustworthy, fast
and usable

to understand the requirements needed to conclude the AI system as worthy (Kaur
et al. 2022) (Table 1.1).
The Black Box Model uses AI methods, the results are obtained, but its design
will not help to justify the result. The explanations are required to extract the output
function. We need to apply some techniques to find the reason to conclude (Zhang
et al. 2022). The Post-Hoc Explainable is a reverse engineering process that starts
to reach the initial state from the destination. Explainable algorithms like Support
Vector Machine (SVM), Multi-Layer Neural Network, Convolution Neural Network
and Recurrent Neural Network (Hermansa et al. 2022). XAI uses machine learning
techniques to justify the results. The reasonable techniques are explained by simplifying the problem, Feature Connectivity, Local Reasoning, Visible Reasoning and
Multi Classifier. The importance of AI is used to make better decisions, explain deep
learning, Model Debugging, and build the latest model (Brito et al. 2022) (Fig. 1.1).
Machine Learning (ML) methods Contribution for XAI—The Machine Learning
method works for limited data. The ML required defined features to the drive result.
The complex problems will simplify and solve phase-wise, network designs are
kept simpler, less trained data and good results are obtained on more and less data
size (Lötsch et al. 2022). The ML concepts are classified into three classes: supervised, unsupervised, and Reinforcement Learning. The methods are Artificial Neural
Network, SVM, Self Organizing Map, Model-based Reinforcement Learning, clustering, Dimension reduction, Regression, Classification, Transfer Learning, and NLP
(Aliramezani et al. 2022).

1.3 Deep Learning (DL) Methods Contribute to XAI
The Deep Learning methods require a huge amount of training data. The feature
extractions are undefined at the initial stage Based on the feature’s importance, the
feature is used for learning. The network training takes more time, based on hidden
layers. As no of hidden layers increases, depth analysis is performed (Raza et al.
2022). The DL algorithms are CNN (Conventional Neural Network), MLP (MultiLayer Perceptron), DNN (Deep Neural Network), and RNN (Recurrent Neural
Network). All the methods extract the results using the above Neural Network. The
above methods measure the performance using ROC, F1-Score, Accuracy, Recall
and Precision metrics (Zhang et al. 2022).
Block Diagram of XAI is shown in Fig. 1.2, Data training is a machine learning
process to teach the environment about the possible case studies and the latest and
most possible cases, calculus applied to find the break-even point and threshold calculations, etc. Different Machine learning methods are used to extract the results. The
Machine learning approaches discussed section I. The recommendation and conclusions are obtained based on the methods of ML Programs selected. The Explainable AI will strength up the decision by explaining the reason for obtained results.
(Hoffman et al. 2018) Functionality difference between AI and XAI, ML functions
will learn from training data and decisions are made based on learned function. The
XAI will train the data, ML process will process the input to obtain the result. The
Explainable AI will reason the result and explanation will be verified by the user to
test the accuracy behavior. The conclusions and recommendations are assessed by
the user (Hermansa et al. 2022) (Table 1.2).


Fig. 1.2 Phases in AI and XAI model

Table 1.2 The details of the Explained AI and Non-XAI for User Perception
S. No.

User perception

AI/ML/DL algorithms

Explainable AI

1

Did the result obtained
cause only this?

Unable to understand
clearly

Understanding clarity

2

Alternate options for
result opted

Unknown reason for not
selecting another choice

Known reason for not
selecting another choice

3

Success in result
obtaining

Unknown for success

Known for success

4

Failure in result obtaining Unknown for failure

Known for failure

5

Trust the system

Unpredictable

Predictable

6

Error in system

Correct based on the false
positive

Reasoning for false
positive

1.4 Intrusion Detection System
This section first explains the concept of IDS and then provides the details about the
classification of IDS based on its deployment and the detection methodology. An
IDS is the combination of two words, “intrusion” and “detection system.” Intrusion
refers to unauthorized access to the information within a computer or network system
to compromise its integrity, confidentiality, or availability. The detection system is a
security mechanism for detecting of such illegal activity. So, IDS is a security tool
that constantly monitors the host and network traffic to detect any suspicious behavior
that violates the security policy and compromises its confidentiality, integrity, and
availability. The IDS will generate alerts about detected malicious behavior to the host
or network administrators. Figure 1.3 depicts a passive deployment of NIDS, where it
is connected to a network switch configured with the port mirroring technology. The
task is to mirror all the incoming and outgoing network traffic to NIDS for performing
traffic monitoring to detect intrusions. NIDS deploys in between the firewall and
the network switch to allow all the traffic to pass through NIDS. IDS have grown
quickly in exploration and industry in light of the expanding digital assaults against
state run administrations and business ventures worldwide. The yearly expense of
battling digital wrongdoing is constantly expanding (Stampar and Fertalj 2015).
The most terrible digital wrongdoings are those brought about by noxious insiders,
refusal of administrations, and online assaults. Businesses or organizations can lose
their licensed innovation because of these pernicious assaults into the framework.
To retaliate against such demonstrations, associations convey a firewall, antivirus
programming, and an interruption discovery framework.
Recently detailed predictions, the deep neural network appropriately suitable for
these various models are useful and difficult to identify. Autonomous vehicles need
various parameters to deal with deep neural networks (Ye et al. 2004). Handling
network administrators is difficult if deep neural network models from machine
learning are implemented. Deep neural networks are also called a black box models.
Decision making process issues are solved with black-box models using trial and error
methods till they reaches for feasible solutions. Intrusion detection system implements machine learning methods to improve the accuracy of familiar attacks’ analysis and identifies abnormal traffic issues and autonomous vehicle network issues.
Machine learning algorithms can identify attacks to interpret the results. The main
challenge is to combine the intrusion detection system with deep learning models to
ensure security policies against attacks.
Various models proposed for intrusion detection systems like statistical methods
(Lazarevic et al. 2003) proposed Markov model (Ye et al. 2004). Neural network
(Novikov et al. 2006), fuzzy logic (Toosi and Kahani 2007) discussed. SVMs
discussed the huge accuracy in implementing intrusion detection systems (Lahre
et al. 2013; Zhang and Shen 2005; Ilgun et al. 1995). Training techniques designed to
implement intrusion detection systems, experts considered the rules. Like, discussed
in Rudin (2019), need corporation rules against expertise in analytical models.
The disadvantage of such analytical models is the extraction of huge rules, which
leads to maximum difficulty in models. One of the critical aspects of a supervised
classification model is feature selection. Identifying required features lessens the
algorithm computation time. Intrusion detection systems expanse with selections
(2017) with various feature. Author (Chebrolu et al. 2005) restricted fundamental
features in composing an intrusion detection system is essential for recent detections.
(Zaman and Karray 2009) Implements the selection models to construct a lightweight
intrusion detection system.
As discussed in Vimalkumar and Radhika (2017), intrusion detection system
models with a ratio profits as various techniques selections and two types of techniques like SVMs and endorsed maximum accurate levels denial of service attacks.
One of the disadvantages of the model is that it is highly computational with a separate ratio and classification algorithm. Balakrishnan et al. (2014) examined different
algorithms like k-means clustering algorithm, Naive Bayes, OneR algorithms for
common traffic with accurate results and Denial of Service attacks. A genetic algorithm is implemented to ensure the identification of various models of intrusion
with maximum efficiency as discussed by Farrahi and Ahmadzadeh (2015). Appliance different machine learning algorithms identify Denial of Service intrusions and
establish the maximum efficiency with multilevel perception (Castelvecchi 2016).
Peng et al. (2018) recommended an intrusion detection system planned on a decision tree to boost the accuracy detection. Naive Bayesian and KNN models are
performing research to find an accuracy to identify the intrusions with better performance, maximum speed and less false alarm rates like in (Othman et al. 2018; Gilpin
et al. 2018).

1.4.1 Classification of Intrusion Detection System
Intrusion detection systems are classified into various types. Firstly the IDS is classified into a network intrusion detection system that helps to identify the packet
search, anonymous packets, inbound and outbound packers in firewalls and controls
the network traffic. Next classifier is a host intrusion detection system that will
monitor the host activities, clients can be ignored in IDS, able to identify the attacks
and detected attacks can stop within the network. Another classifier is a protocolbased intrusion detection system used to analyse and monitor communication and
monitor HTTP protocols and SQL protocols. Along with all the classifiers the hybrid
intrusion detection systems works more efficiently by combining two or more IDS
classifiers like host intrusion detection system and network-based intrusion detection
system helps to monitor the system, application events and file systems. This hybrid
IDS uses for critical server situations (Lin et al. 2022) (Fig. 1.4).

Fig. 1.4 Classification of Intrusion detections system

1.5 Applications of Cyber Security and XAI
It may be described as the method to relax the safety if you want to shield reputation
casually, less business or monetary lack of a cluster Cyber security manifestly needs
betters for safety with the notion to the business enterprise that regular customers
use the network over the internet. Many intelligent tactics and strategies can be castoff to install in it. The finest huge reality around safeguarding data is no longer
a non-prevent process. The business enterprise owner must hold stuff modernized
in mandate to keep the danger low (Bonfanti 2022). A business wants to appear a
massive harm when they are no longer sincere about the protection in their online
display. Nowadays, everyone connects from innovative cybercrime issues to single
user issues like attacks, thefts, blackmails, illegal photographs. All are predicted
at risk according to the financial supplier of businesses. Giving security to those
various fields is vital to understanding general operations like handling information
corresponding to credit cards and authorization information. Handling such sensitive
data fails is one of the possible cyber attacks. Handling such sensitive data fails is one
of the possible cyber attacks. To Gain knowledge on vicious emails, you need to study
cyber security. Ransomware is another sort of vicious software program, considered
to extract forex with the aid of gadgets or desktops and demand for money. Though
after paying money to hacks, it’s not guaranteed that the malware is removed from
the gadgets or not (Urooj et al. 2022).
Social engineering is a tactic that fighters use to faux you into illuminating sensitive facts. They can importune a monetarist charge or development gets right of entry
to your reserved information. Social engineering may be collective with a number
of the pressures registered above to fashion you extra in all likelihood to attach on
links, switch malware, or perceive a malicious purpose. Most commercial enterprise
operations goals run on the net, exposing their information and assets to diverse
cyber threats. Since the information and gadget assets are the pillars upon which
the agency operates, it drives the missing maxim that a threat to those people is
surely a hazard to the institution itself. A hazard may be everywhere among a minor
worm in a code to a complicated cloud hijacking liability. Risk evaluation and estimation of the reconstruction fee assist the agency in living organized and to appear
beforehand for capacity losses (Rajanikanth 2021). Thus, understanding and formulating cyber security goals specific to each agency is important in protecting precious
information. Cyber security is an exercise formulated for the project of complicated
information on the net and on gadgets safeguarding them from attack, destruction, or
unauthorized get right of entry to it. Cyber security aims to ensure threat-loose and
stable surroundings for retaining the information, community, and gadgets guarded
in opposition to cyber terrorizations. Cyber security has become a main challenge
over the past 10–12 months within the IT world. All people are dealing with quite
a few cybercrime issues in the existing world. As hackers are hacking principal
touchy facts from authorities and a few corporation agencies, the people are very
much involved as cyber security attacks can result in the whole thing from wholesale fraud to blackmail massive companies. There are many sorts of cyber-crimes
rising wherein everybody wishes to be aware of the scams, and they’re one of a
kind measures and gear which may use for averting the cyber-crimes. Every agency
desires to stabilize its private information from getting hacked. Getting hacked isn’t
always dropping the private information, but dropping the connection with clients
within the market. The Internet is the modern day’s fastest developing infrastructure. In modern-day technical surroundings, many new technologies are converting
humanity. But because of technology, we’re not able to guard our non-public facts
in a green way, so cyber-crimes are significantly growing on day by day basis. The
majority of the transactions in each business and private sector are achieved through
an online transaction, so it’s crucial to have knowledge that requires an excessive
best of safety, retaining higher transparency to everybody and having more secure
transactions. So cyber security is the present-day issue. Advanced technology like
cloud services, mobiles, E-commerce, net banking and plenty of extra require excessive requirements and a more secure system of safety. All the gear and technology
concerned for those transactions keep the maximum touchy and crucial consumer
facts. So presenting vital safety to them may be very crucial. Cyber security and safeguarding touchy information and infrastructures are crucial to each nation’s pinnacle
precedence safety (Bendovschi and Ionescu 2015).
Organizations may see the loss if they are not transparent in security while stepping
online. Nowadays, all know the progressive cyber defense agendas. Cyber security
may lead to other results from natural theft, loss of photographs, and blackmail
attempts at different levels. It all depends on the business levels, monetary services,
infirmaries etc. Trusting and providing security in operations is compulsory. Cyber
threat investigators train the users on position and recent susceptibilities also. Various
kinds of cyber security phishing scam emails from different sources. The main aim
of the data is to maintain the security and privacy of credit card details for user
logins which is the highest attack on the organization. Ransomware is one malicious
software to blackmail the organization by leaking data or blocking the systems until
the organization pays the demanded price. Malware is another kind of software to
receive prohibited policy after using it to the system (Gazet 2010).
Enlightening sensitive data is another gimmick in social websites where malicious users can miss-use. The main aim of the huge business operations is to work
on the online data and resources, leading to different kinds of cyber threats. The
data and resources are an important support for any organization. If any organization lacks security for these two data and resources, it’s a big threat from a small
bug to difficult data seizing. The reconstruction cost of the organization is very high
and may lose the customers due to a lack of trust in the organization. The objective
of cyber security for any organization is securing the data and valuable customer
information. Cyber security is one of the best practices for organizations to secure
difficult online data and provide security from various attacks, destroying the data or
checking the authorization or authentication for genuine users to access the data. The
main achievement of cyber security is to make sure the surroundings are harmless
surroundings for storing data, networks, and resources in contrast to cyber attacks.
Among IT industry cyberattacks is one of the main issues from the past 10 years.
Presently many common people are facing the cyber attacks problem with cybercrime. Hackers are able to get the sensitive data from the common people and from
small organizations to huge organizations also. Different types of cyber crimes are
increasing day to day life which gives alert to everyone to be understanding about
the cybercrime now to avoid cyber crimes.
Every customer and organization tries to secure the data from the cyber-attacks
discussed by Bendovschi in 2015. As infrastructure is emerging rapidly nowadays,
the technologies are increasing and changing today. Due to this, we are losing hold
on personal data and secure data, which regularly leads to increased cybercrimes
(Hussain et al. 2021).
Non-commercial and commercial transactions mainly are happening through the
internet. It’s mandatory to ensure the experts provide high security and maintain transparency for more safety. New methods like cloud service providers, smartphones,
E-commerce, net banking or mobile banking, telecom services need huge security in
the implementation. Various tools and techniques tangled the critical sensitive client
data.
XAI object detection software applications are designed to identify the objects on
the image, video or online live streaming. The computer vision techniques are used to
find objects, count similar objects, identify the object, identify the location, and read
an image. The algorithms used are R-CNN, HOG, R-FCN, Single Short Detector, and
YOLO (you only look once) (Kose et al. 2019). The Deep Neural Network is a ‘black
box’ in behavior. The CNN algorithm will train the neural network; the reasoning for
the output is evaluated using techniques Predicate Logic for self-monitoring methods
(Floreano and Wood 2015).
Explaining Autonomous Drones application is specially designed to provide
carrier service on mountains or hills. The uneven heights of the land and rocks have
an issue in flight traffic plan, drone root plan, and physical location features. The
AI Drones are designed with Common Ground Learning and Explanation System
(CGLES) with Explainable intelligence to what is comparable, why it is a drone,
where explanation. Simultaneously performance prediction with explanations, PreDetection and Post-Detection Explanation used to determine the performance of the
CGLE system. Pre-Detection is used to define the plan and execution performance,
and Post-Detection is used to determine and find the betterment (Tseremoglou et al.
2022).
Explaining forecasting and packing for Air Cargo loading application will predict
and decide to air cargo service to help accept or reject the booking based on the
estimation of passenger aircraft belly. The cargos services are unpredictable due to the
last hrs cargo service details being released. The training data and historical studies
will help to predict the certainty. The author proposed a novel framework to provide
process consideration based on the balance of aircraft capacity and dimensions of
the ship (Han and Liu 2022).
Explaining Structure Health Monitoring through AI and ML applications are
used to detect the extract the features and predict the patterns. Machine Learning is
used for transparent processing, and some limiting features will undergo black-box
execution. The XAI preprocessing problem uses applications in ML algorithms. An
explanation is retrieved, interpretations and finally, build XAI model. The first ML
algorithms are SHM systems. In this phase, it is required to remove the noise in the
data and improper information. Supervised, unsupervised and reinforcement are the
approaches. Four algorithms and ML algorithms are used to understand the problem,
confirm the method, apply the method, explain the output, and interpret (Chou et al.
2022; Swapna et al. 2022; Kanaparthi and Swapna 2022).
Explainable AI for Deep Learning Models applications is specially used in applications for big data as it is difficult to handle for a complex task (Anders et al.
2021). Large scales of application are Speech Recognition, Text Analysis, Problem
Solving and Image Classification. The above applications run very successfully for
ML and AI concepts. But the decision extracted is not transparent. The author took
an image classification problem in identifying the object and Interpreted the reason
for classification. The process has been decomposed into classification steps. The
input(x) was applied to a black box AI system and was predicted as a Rooster(x).
The prediction has an AI explanation (we will verify the predictions, Identify the
issues and differences, understand the problem, ensure the problem) (Han and Liu
2022).
Explaining AI for the Breast Cancer Detection Case based on reasoning applications designed in old patients or new patients, the general classification is the
black-box approach. The measures are considered based on the terms of values
and quality-wise. It has an automatic interpretation. The Databases are designed and
retrieved using queries. The automatic case retrieval system will extract similar cases
and retrieve preprocess queries stored in temporary memory. Automatic classification
is used to classify the database, the reasoning based on Quantitative and Qualitative.
The visual reasoning with query’s and class classifications. The three algorithms are
tested KNN, WKNN and RBIA to find the clinical validation to improve the study of
CBR, and the third is to size the tumor. Finally, the knowledge discovered from the
medical dataset analyzer not only from CBR (Zhang et al. 2022; Swapna and Hegde
2021).
Various methods in XAI to predict the outputs are:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.

SHAP (Fidel et al. 2020)
LIME (Visani et al. 2020)
SHAPASH (Ghosh and Sanyal 2021)
EXPLAINER DASHBOARD
DALEX (Baniecki et al. 2020)
EXPLAINABLE BOOSTING MACHINES (Naser 2021).

SHAP (Shapley additive explanations) is a python tool used to visualize the
model’s output using Machine Learning implementation and helps visualize the
output with more explanation. This algorithm will help explain the reason for the
output of the prediction model. In the SHAP feature, importance is the first step to
finding the important attribute from another attribute, and they are evaluated using
slandered deviation and mean. It will help to remove the impurity in the decision.
The SHAP will plot different plots like the SHAP Summary Plot used to combine
the features and plot data points. SHAP Dependence plot will help plot the marginal
effect of features, SHAP Force used for error analysis, explanation for findings for
prediction (Kuzlu et al. 2020).
LIME (Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations) is another python
package used to predict the classification and regression of the data. All the sample
data will be extracted from the feature, and observe the results. The explainer will
help to predict the result for each output. The linear regression is regularized. The
difference between output and actual will use r2. The difference between actual and
predicted output gave by linear regression function. It will explain the black-box
model machine learning model. Local Interpretation will help to calculate trustiness
and it also prove the untruth the model and visual explanation (Främling et al. 2021).
SHAPASH is a python library to Interpretable the Machine Learning results. It
uses to build the Web Application to interpret the decision of the data scientist, users
or customers, Stake holders of the business and Evaluators of the system. It provides
the visualization explanation, to understand by the common users. The shapash has
five step processes.
Step 1: Regression model is Build.
Step 2: SmartExplainer of Shapash is compiled and displayed on the webapp.
Step 3: Smart Predictor is predicted from the SmartExplainer.
Step 4: SmartPredictor can be saved in pickle File.
Step 5: Finally predictions can be made (Ghosh and Sanyal 2021).
EXPLAINER DASHBOARD is an interactive dashboard works for the machine
learning models. It helps to analyze the reasons for the predictors and explanation on the working of the model. The Explainable Dashboard will help to build
the unclouded machine learning model and Explainable. Classifier Dashboard has
features like Classification Stats, Individual Predictions, and Own Condition prediction, Feature Dependence, Feature Interaction and Decision Tree. This can be
supported by Colab Programming. The dashboards are different types like single
tab dashboard, Multi-TabDashboard, Documentation Dashboard etc. are the sample
types of dashboards.
DALEX is a model Agnostic Language for Exploration and eXplanation is a
Machine Learning analysis model helps to learn the behavior of the Model Predictor
in Classification process and Applying Regression methods. This approach will also
help to build the relation between the dependent variable to predict the outputs. It is
also an interactive model for exploration of predictions. Explanatory Model Analysis.
This model works with different levels of explanations like predict Level Explanation,
Model Level Explanation, Save and Loading Explanation. Plot the graphs for user
visualizations (Baniecki et al. 2020).
EXPLAINABLE BOOSTING MACHINES (EBM) are the cyclic Gradient
boosting Adaptive model, tree-based classification and interactive model. This
method for predication is said to be black box model, which said to be more accurate.
Limitation is EBM will take long time to train the model but very fast at prediction.
The process for EBM is train the model for classifiers, Visualization is explained in
terms of local and Global. The Specific attribute analysis need to perform. All the
Attribute Mean Absolute Score need to calculate (Naser 2021) (Table 1.3).
Table 1.3 Comparison of XAI techniques
References

Methods

Intrinsic

Roth et al.
(2021)

Decision trees

Check

Check

Check

Das and
Rad (2020)

Rule lists

Check

Check

Check

Dieber and
Kirrane
(2020)

Lime

Post-hoc

Global
logic

Local
logic

Specific
model

Agnostic
model

Check

Check

Check

Dhanorkar Sharply
et al. (2021) explanations

Check

Check

Check

Schlegel
Saliency maps
et al. (2019)

Check

Check

Check

Fouladgar
and
Främling
(2020)

Activation
maximization

Check

Check

Check

Kłosok and
Chlebus
(2020)

Surrogate
models

Check

Check

Check

(continued)

1 Black Box Models for eXplainable Artificial Intelligence

17

Table 1.3 (continued)
References

Methods

Ryo et al.
(2021)

Partial
dependence
plot

Post-hoc

Global
logic

Local
logic

Check

Check

Check

Check

Barbado
Rule extraction
et al. (2022)

Check

Check

Check

Check

Adadi and
Berrada
(2018)

Model
distillation

Check

Check

Baur (2018) Sensitive
analysis

Check

Check

Keane et al. Counterfactual
(2021)
explanations

Check

Heide et al.
(2021)

Check
Check

Prototype and
criticism

Layer wise
Anders
et al. (2021) relevance
program

Intrinsic

Specific
model

Agnostic
model

Check

Check

Check

Check

Check

Check

Check

Check

Check

Check

Check

1.6 Comparison of XAI Using Black Box Methods
The depth analysis of classifications of black-box models discusses in this section
using XAI. The reverse engineering approach is used in the black box also familiar
with black box predictors observing the input and output of the black box. Assigning
decisions to black boxes is difficult to interpret may have differences and trust problems. Former datasets and training models handling human decisions could depend
on (Pedreshi et al. 2008). These methods are acutely covered up inside the classified
trainer. Improving the black-box model is a high risk, as discussed in Pasquale (2015),
and carried by secret algorithms, legal protections, and differences consciously or
unconsciously may lead to invisible or impossible. Automated differences are not new
and not compulsorily due to the black box (Kuppa and Le-Khac 2020). Comparison
methods for black-box models using XAI are discussed in the below table. The data
types are used to analyze the black box models using XAI. General is the explanatory
method to reach every black-box method. Random is the type indicated to randomly
select any random perturbation of a data set. Code indicates the source code is available. The tabular method data set analyses the comparisons for black-box models
using XAI (Table 1.4).

Table 1.4 Comparison methods for black box models using XAI
Reference

Explanator model

Black box types

Dataset technique

Fidel et al. (2020)

Decision tree

Neural network

General, dataset

Krishnan et al.
(1999)

Decision tree

Neural network

General, dataset

Kuppa and
Le-Khac (2020)

Decision tree

Neural network

General, random

Zhang and Shen
(2005)

Decision tree

Neural network

General, random

Chipman et al.
(1998)

Decision tree

Tree ensemble

Dataset

Peng et al. (2018)

Decision tree

Tree ensemble

General, random, dataset

Roth et al. (2021)

Decision tree

Tree ensemble

General, random

Hara and Hayashi
(2016)

Decision tree

Tree ensemble

Random

Farrahi and
Ahmadzadeh
(2015)

Decision tree

Tree ensemble

Random

Främling et al.
(2021)

Decision tree

Tree ensemble

General, random

Pasquale (2015)

Decision tree

Tree ensemble

Dataset

Adadi and Berrada Decision rules
(2018)

Neural network

Random

Adadi and Berrada Decision rules
(2018)

Neural network

General, random

Farrahi and
Ahmadzadeh
(2015)

Neural network

General, random, code,
dataset

Decision rules

Ryo et al. (2021)

Decision rules

Neural network

Random, dataset

Chebrolu et al.
(2005)

Decision rules

SVMs

Dataset

Balakrishnan et al. Decision rules
(2014)

SVMs

Dataset

Vimalkumar and
Radhika (2017)

Features importance

AGNostic black box

General, code, dataset

Urooj et al. (2022) Features importance

AGNostic black box

General, random, code,
dataset

Rudin (2019)

Decision tree

Lahre et al. (2013) Features importance

AGNostic black box

General, dataset

AGNostic black box

General, random, code,
dataset
(continued)

Table 1.4 (continued)
Reference

Explanator model

Heide et al. (2021) Features importance

Black box types

Dataset technique

AGNostic black box

General, random, code,
dataset

Brito et al. (2022)

Features importance

Tree ensemble

Dataset

Barbado et al.
(2022)

Features importance

SVMs

Code, dataset

1.7 Conclusion
AI takes final decisions with the help of difficult model analysis to calculate potentially secret patterns and low signals using huge data sets. Approaching the real-time
application for trusting the AI-related solution. Analyzing and considering the AIrelated solutions is required for trusting the applications in real-time. Cyber security
systems are important applications sensitive to systems that are at risk in vicious
attacks. Accordingly, decision tree algorithms for vicious nodes describe by handling
the available datasets. Performance is calculated based on major tasks in the dataset
like identifying ranks, decision tree extraction, and state of the art algorithms correlation. All the methods do not have the same level of improvement as the vicious
node predictions. The various methods in XAI and the network traffic model are
calculated with a double-time window as the important predictors in the decision
tree and related to deep root node algorithms. The next second-highest rank is the
feature-based network service for the personal TCP connection. This book chapter
addresses problems like black-box model types, mapping the cyber security in XAI,
and the role and importance of IDS in XAI. Black box working process and explaining
decisions even without understanding the depth of opaque decision systems work
regularly. Various approaches introduced in black boxes and a few scientific queries
are still unable to answer. Research exercises neglected regular reading formalism by
defining, describing, and identifying various types. XAI research is dependent on the
application domains and affects the various huge applications. The evidence is the
main drawback of formulation and unambiguous definitions. The work is affected
by challenges with open problems in XAI. Finally, the further intriguing point is that
clarifications are significant alone and indicators may be advanced straightforwardly
from clarifications. AI is a powerful device that can be utilized in numerous areas
of data security. There exist some vigorous enemies of phishing calculations and
organization interruption identification frameworks. AI can be effectively utilized to
create validation frameworks, assess the convention execution, survey the security
of human collaboration verifications, brilliant meter information profiling, etc. Even
though AI protects different frameworks, the AI classifiers are defenseless against
vindictive assaults. Some work has been coordinated to work on the adequacy of
XAI calculations and safeguarding them from different assaults.